# The End of Eternity by Issac Asimov

Issac Asimov has written a series of science fiction books from *The Foundation* series to the *I, Robot* series.  He has even connected the series starting with the rise of robot and AI technology to the colonization of space to the fall of a Galatic empire.  I find so many of his concepts fancinating and the way it weaves into the boks thrilling.  On some occasions, its a delightful twist but other occasions it seems forced to tie a series together.  Psychohistory in the Foundation series has been a thrilling concept in terms of being able to predict  future events, not with certainty but based on probabilities.  It is almost like the prediction of possible outcomes based on human psychology, economy, and politics.  Something that applies aptly to the world today with populist government regimes and radical nationalist attitudes versus globalization initiatives thriving on the hunger of innovation and economic growth.  

With different country models that have happened through our history from colonization to nationalism isolation policies to capital markets and exports to socialist/communist movements to populist/conservative movements.  We might look to draw out lessons on the development of a society as it tries to advanced from a rural/agrarian society to a modern/capitalist society.  Li Lu points us to a good book discussing this development with China going through this change, yet has subsequent implications on the connected world.

Countries start off agragrian, consuming its basic resources to meet immediate needs.  It is often exploited as a resource farm for more developed countries.  These countries rise and move into basic manufacturing of goods that can start to be exported and traded globally.  This is a sensitive stage as these companies can often be forced to import advanced goods and technologies above what they export and thus an outflow of wealth occurs and prevents the country to making further infrastructure investments to advance.  Or these infrastructure investments are made by developed countries abroad through economic manipulations (*Confessions of an Economic Hitman*) in which they end up owning the infrastructure assets and hence the growth engines and reap the benefits while leaving the host country heavily indebted.  If the country somehow is able to remain in control (like modern capitalist China as opposed to 19th century China under spheres of influence) they might be able to leverage the global knowledge and leapfrog into advanced technology development with less costs fron trial and error.  Will these new countries be able to develop like US did and leapfrog the empires of today?  That will be curious to observe.

So I guess I should talk about this book, *The End of Eternity*.  The premise is that the human race has discovered the ability to time travel and an entity known as Eternity sits outside the different time streams to observe and prevent terrible tragedies in reality.  They are able to travel into different time periods and observe different customs, speeches, attitudes, and culutural developments of that period.  If anything terrible is bound to happen that would wipe out humanity, they go back in time and calculate the "minimum viable change" to offset such occurance.  This could be the tampering of a handbrake that delays a student from arriving to a conference on time, which prevents him from attending a lecture in science that would have lead him to become an innovator in that same and go on to invent nuclear energy a century earlier.  Without the technology for nuclear energy, a world war would not have had the atom bomb that dramatically devestates the world.  (Hmmm...kind of like <u>The Man in the High Castle<u> except the Nazis do go on to get nuclear engergy first and even intersellar travel.)  The calculating of MVC is quite like the calculations of Psychohistory that the Second Foundation uses to guide the course of history.  
  
  ||SPOILERS|| <br>
  ||SPOILERS|| <br>
The novel discusses time of the normal time paradoxes like not letting time travel be widely known and having the least interference in history to prevent unintended ripple effects.  There is the paradox of not meeting oneself and occupying the same time-space.  Then the novel goes on to reveal the closed loop of someone going back in time to create the technology necessary for time travel and creatiogn of Eternity.  They are given just what they need to known and gentlely guided along to make the same choices that lead to the current history of Eternity - the Victor Memoirs.  But how can one time period believe they will be more intellectually superior to the time periods to come after them?  ||SPOILER||  In a twist, someone is sent from the even further future  who has studied what Eternity's time manipulation has created.  Because of Eternity's governance to prevent something terribly bad from happening, they have also prevented a lot of good from happening.  Because humans spent their ingenuity on time travel, they never developed the technology for space travel.  In lost centuries timeline, by the time humanity did begin to explore space travel, it had already been colonized by other lifeforms, younger lifeforms that had leapfrogged humanity as they tampered with time travel.  Relegated to earth, humanity slowly died out over time.  Instead, they could have gone off to conquer most of space and go on to establish a galatic empire.  Pressumably this was the empire in the Foundation series.  This novel goes on to show that there might never have been the Foundation set of stories.  This one pivotal period that is unrecalled by anyone, yet helped lead to shape the rest of Asimov's storylines.  This book was not a formal part of the foundation series or Asimov's main timeline.  But it fit in some deliciously as a small arc on how the Foundaton might have never came to be.  
