__ Modern Monetary Theory

This have been a confusing topic for me and I did not understand the wikipedia article but the book "The Deficit Myth" by Stephanie Kelton is making some good arguements.  One of the central issues seems to be that the American Government cannot default on its debt as long as it is in US Dollars.  The gvt prints dollars so it can always pay off its debt at any time.  This seems fundamentally sound to me.  In a closed looped system this should not be a problem but money is an open loop with other countries with some resrictions since we are talking about USD.  Nationally, the American government should have fiscal control but printing too much money can cause devaluating of the USD internationally.  It is hard to say other countries will not want to take payment in USD as it is the peg for many other currrencies.  However, this could reek global economic catastrophy.  

One key element to keep in mind is that printing money will cause USD inflation.  At a level of about 2%, this is good but if the government prints too much moey too quickly and adds it to the money supply, we will have hyperinflation.  At a low level, the gvt deficit mean a surplus transferred to the consumer economy.  The book argues that the government is not like a household that needs to balance their budget because it is the source of the money supply and is on a different size of the equation.  It argues that we should increase the deficit to create more economic surplus in the consumer economy.  
